---
title:  "80286 Manual Chapter 1 Summary"
date:   2025-08-17
draft: true
categories: ["cpu"]
tags: ["cpu", "80286"]
author: Sanketh
references:
---

# Chapter 1: Introduction to the 80286

The 80286 is the most powerful 16-bit processor in the 8086 series of
microprocessors, which includes the 8086, the 8088, the 80186, the 80188,
and the 80286. It is designed for applications that require very high
performance. It is also an excellent choice for sophisticated "high end"
applications that will benefit from its advanced architectural features:
memory management, protection mechanisms, task management, and virtual
memory support. The 80286 provides, on a single VLSI chip, computational
and architectural characteristics normally associated with much larger
minicomputers.

Sections 1.1, 1.2, and 1.3 of this chapter provide an overview of the 80286
architecture. Because the 80286 represents an extension of the 8086
architecture, some of this overview material may be new and unfamiliar to
previous users of the 8086 and similar microprocessors. But the 80286 is
also an evolutionary development, with the new architecture superimposed
upon the industry standard 8086 in such a way as to affect only the design
and programming of operating systems and other such system software.
Section 1.4 of this chapter provides a guide to the organization of this
manual, suggesting which chapters are relevant to the needs of particular
readers.

## 1.1 General Attributes

The 80286 base architecture has many features in common with the
architecture of other members of the 8086 family, such as byte addressable
memory, I/O interfacing hardware, interrupt vectoring, and support for both
multiprocessing and processor extensions. The entire family has a common
set of addressing modes and basic instructions. The 80286 base architecture
also includes a number of extensions which add to the versatility of the
computer.

The 80286 processor can function in two modes of operation (see section 1.2
of this chapter, Modes of Operation). In one of these modes only the base
architecture is available to programmers, whereas in the other mode a number
of very powerful advanced features have been added, including support for
virtual memory, multitasking, and a sophisticated protection mechanism.
These advanced features are described in section 1.3 of this chapter.

The 80286 base architecture was designed to support programming in
high-level languages, such as Pascal, C or PL/M. The register set and
instructions are well suited to compiler-generated code. The addressing
modes (see section 2.4.3 in Chapter 2) allow efficient addressing
of complex data structures, such as static and dynamic arrays, records,
and arrays within records, which are commonly supported by high-level
languages. The data types supported by the architecture include, along with
bytes and words, high level language constructs such as strings, BCD, and
floating point.

The memory architecture of the 80286 was designed to support modular
programming techniques. Memory is divided into segments, which may be of
arbitrary size, that can be used to contain procedures and data structures.
Segmentation has several advantages over more conventional linear memory
architectures. It supports structured software, since segments can contain
meaningful program units and data, and more compact code, since references
within a segment can be shorter (and locality of reference usually insures
that the next few references will be within the same segment). Segmentation
also lends itself to efficient implementation of sophisticated memory
management, virtual memory, and memory protection.

In addition, new instructions have been added to the base architecture to
give hardware support for procedure invocations, parameter passing, and
array bounds checking.

## 1.2 Modes of Operation

The 80286 can be operated in either of two different modes: Real Address
Mode or Protected Virtual Address Mode (also referred to as Protected Mode).
In either mode of operation, the 80286 represents an upwardly compatible
addition to the 8086 family of processors.

In Real Address Mode, the 80286 operates essentially as a very
high-performance 8086. Programs written for the 8086 or the 80186 can be
executed in this mode without any modification (the few exceptions are
described in Appendix C, "Compatibility Considerations"). Such upward
compatibility extends even to the object code level; for example, an 8086
program stored in read-only memory will execute successfully in 80286 Real
Address Mode. An 80286 operating in Real Address Mode provides a number of
instructions not found on the 8086. These additional instructions, also
present with the 80186, allow for efficient subroutine linkage, parameter
validation, index calculations, and block I/O transfers.

The advanced architectural features and full capabilities of the 80286 are
realized in its native Protected Mode. Among these features are
sophisticated mechanisms to support data protection, system integrity, task
concurrency, and memory management, including virtual storage.
Nevertheless, even in Protected Mode, the 80286 remains upwardly compatible
with most 8086 and 80186 application programs. Most 8086 applications
programs can be re-compiled or re-assembled and executed on the 80286 in
Protected Mode.

## 1.3 Advanced Features

The architectural features described in section 1.1 of this chapter
are common to both operating modes of the processor. In addition to these
common features, Protected Mode provides a number of advanced features,
including a greatly extended physical and logical address space, new
instructions, and support for additional hardware-recognized data
structures. The Protected Mode 80286 includes a sophisticated memory
management and multilevel protection mechanism. Full hardware support is
included for multitasking and task switching operations.

### 1.3.1 Memory Management

The memory architecture of the Protected Mode 80286 represents a
significant advance over that of the 8086. The physical address space has
been increased from 1 megabyte to 16 megabytes (2^(24) bytes), while the
virtual address space (i.e., the address space visible to a program) has
been increased from 1 megabyte to 1 gigabyte (2^(30) bytes). Moreover,
separate virtual address spaces are provided for each task in a
multi-tasking system (see the next section, 1.3.2, "Task Management").

The 80286 supports on-chip memory management instead of relying on an
external memory management unit. The one-chip solution is preferable because
no software is required to manage an external memory management unit,
performance is much better, and hardware designs are significantly simpler.

Mechanisms have been included in the 80286 architecture to allow the
efficient implementation of virtual memory systems. (In virtual memory
systems, the user regards the combination of main and external storage as a
single large memory. The user can write large programs without worrying
about the physical memory limitations of the system. To accomplish this, the
operating system places some of the user programs and data in external
storage and brings them into main memory only as they are needed.) All
instructions that can cause a segment-not-present fault are fully
restartable. Thus, a not-present segment can be loaded from external
storage, and the task can be restarted at the point where the fault
occurred.

The 80286, like all members of the 8086 series, supports a segmented memory
architecture. The 80286 also fully integrates memory segmentation into a
comprehensive protection scheme. This protection scheme includes
hardware-enforced length and type checking to protect segments from
inadvertent misuse.

### 1.3.2 Task Management

The 80286 is designed to support multi-tasking systems. The architecture
provides direct support for the concept of a task. For example, task state
segments (see section 8.2 in Chapter 8) are hardware-recognized and
hardware-manipulated structures that contain information on the current
state of all tasks in the system.

Very efficient context-switching (task-switching) can be invoked with a
single instruction. Separate logical address spaces are provided for each
task in the system. Finally, mechanisms exist to support intertask
communication, synchronization, memory sharing, and task scheduling. Task
Management is described in Chapter 8.

### 1.3.3 Protection Mechanisms

The 80286 allows the system designer to define a comprehensive protection
policy to be applied, uniformly and continuously, to all ongoing operations
of the system. Such a policy may be desirable to ensure system reliability,
privacy of data, rapid error recovery, and separation of multiple users.

The 80286 protection mechanisms are based on the notion of a "hierarchy of
trust." Four privilege levels are distinguished, ranging from Level 0 (most
trusted) to Level 3 (least trusted). Level 0 is usually reserved for the
operating system kernel. The four levels may be visualized as concentric
rings, with the most privileged level in the center (see figure 1-1).

This four-level scheme offers system reliability, flexibility, and design
options not possible with the typical two-level (supervisor/user) separation
provided by other processors. A four-level division is capable of separating
kernel, executive, system services, and application software, each with
different privileges.

At any one time, a task executes at one of the four levels. Moreover, all
data segments and code segments are also assigned to privilege levels. A
task executing at one level cannot access data at a more privileged level,
nor can it call a procedure at a less privileged level (i.e., trust a less
privileged procedure to do work for it). Thus, both access to data and
transfer of control are restricted in appropriate ways.

A complete separation can exist between the logical address spaces local to
different tasks, providing users with automatic protection against
accidental or malicious interference by other users. The hardware also
provides immediate detection of a number of fault and error conditions, a
feature that can be useful in the development and maintenance of software.

Finally, these protection mechanisms require relatively little system
overhead because they are integrated into the memory management and
protection hardware of the processor itself.

**Figure 1-1. Four Privilege Levels**
```
                       ÉÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍ»
                       º          LEVEL 3 ÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ×ÄÄLEAST TRUSTED
                       º  ÉÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍ»  º
                       º  º       LEVEL 2       º  º
                       º  º  ÉÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍ»  º  º
                       º  º  º    LEVEL 1    º  º  º
                       º  º  º  ÉÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍ»  º  º  º
                       º  º  º  º LEVEL 0 º  º  º  º
                       º  º  º  º        º  º  º  º
                       º  º  º  ÈÍÍÍÍÍÍÍØÍ¼  º  º  º
                       º  º  º          ³    º  º  º
                       º  º  ÈÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍØÍÍÍÍ¼  º  º
                       º  º             ³       º  º
                       º  ÈÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍØÍÍÍÍÍÍÍ¼  º
                       º                ³          º
                       ÈÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍØÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍ¼
                                        ³
                                        ÀMOST TRUSTED
```

### 1.3.4 Support for Operating Systems

Most operating systems involve some degree of concurrency, with multiple
tasks vying for system resources. The task management mechanisms described
above provide the 80286 with inherent support for such multi-tasking
systems. Moreover, the advanced memory management features of the 80286
allow the implementation of sophisticated virtual memory systems.

Operating system implementors have found that a multi-level approach to
system services provides better security and more reliable systems. For
example, a very secure kernel might implement critical functions such as
task scheduling and resource allocation, while less fundamental functions
(such asI/O) are built around the kernel. This layered approach also makes
program development and enhancement simpler and facilitates error detection
and debugging. The 80286 supports the layered approach through its
four-level privilege scheme.

## 1.4 Organization of This Book

To facilitate the use of this book both as an introduction to the 80286
architecture and as a reference guide, the remaining chapters are divided
into three major parts.

Part I, comprising chapters 2 through 4, should be read by all those who
wish to acquire a basic familiarity with the 80286 architecture. These
chapters provide detailed information on memory segmentation, registers,
addressing modes and the general (application level) 80286 instruction set.
In conjunction with the 80286 Assembly Language Reference Manual, these
chapters provide sufficient information for an assembly language programmer
to design and write application programs.

The chapters in Part I are:

- Chapter 2, "Architectural Features." This chapter discusses those features
of the 80286 architecture that are significant for application programmers.
The information presented can also function as an introduction to the
machine for system programmers. Memory organization and segmentation,
processor registers, addressing modes, and instruction formats are all
discussed.

- Chapter 3, "Basic Instruction Set." This chapter presents the core
instructions of the 8086 family.

- Chapter 4, "Extended Instruction Set." This chapter presents the extended
instructions shared by the 80186 and 80286 processors.

Part II of the book consists of a single chapter:

- Chapter 5, "Real Address Mode." This chapter presents the system
programmer's view of the 80286 when the processor is operated in Real
Address Mode.

Part III of the book comprises chapters 6 through 11. Aimed primarily at
system programmers, these chapters discuss the more advanced architectural
features of the 80286, which are available when the processor is in
Protected Mode. Details on memory management, protection mechanisms, and
task switching are provided.

The chapters in Part III are:

- Chapter 6, "Virtual Memory." This chapter describes the 80286 address
translation mechanisms that support virtual memory. Segment descriptors,
global and local descriptor tables, and descriptor caches are discussed.

- Chapter 7, "Protection." This chapter describes the protection features of
the 80286. Privilege levels, segment attributes, access restrictions, and
call gates are discussed.

- Chapter 8, "Tasks and State Transitions." This chapter describes the 80286
mechanisms that support concurrent tasks. Context-switching, task state
segments, task gates, and interrupt tasks are discussed.

- Chapter 9, "Interrupts, Traps and Faults." This chapter describes interrupt
and trap handling. Special attention is paid to the exception traps, or
faults, which may occur in Protected Mode. Interrupt gates, trap gates, and
the interrupt descriptor table are discussed.

- Chapter 10, "System Control and Initialization." This chapter describes the
actual instructions used to implement the memory management, protection, and
task support features of the 80286. System registers, privileged
instructions, and the initial machine state are discussed.

- Chapter 11, "Advanced Topics." This chapter completes Part III with a
description of several advanced topics, including special segment attributes
and pointer validation.

## 1.5 Related Publications

The following manuals also contain information of interest to programmers
of 80287 systems:

- Introduction to the 80286, order number 210308
- ASM286 Assembly Language Reference Manual, order number 121924
- 80286 Operating System Writer's Guide, order number 121960
- 80286 Hardware Reference Manual, order number 210760
- Microprocessor and Peripheral Handbook, order number 230843
- PL/M-286 User's Guide, order number 121945
- 80287 Support Library Reference Manual, order number 122129
- 8086 Software Toolbox Manual, order number 122203 (includes
  information about 80287 Emulator Software)